Running the Server
	1.	Place the runme.jar file and properties file in the same directory, the property file name is suncertify.properties.
	2.	Type the following on the command line and press return. 
	⁃	java -jar runme.jar server &
	3.	The above command will result in the display of the server GUI. Enter the following parameters requested in the GUI.
	⁃	Enter the database file name in the field labeled “Database File Name” or use the file chooser by clicking on the button next to the text field.
	⁃	Enter the name for the RMI server in the field labeled “Server name”.
	⁃	Enter the port number in the field labeled “Server Port Number”. The default value - “0” is displayed in this field, the default value will be used if a new value is not entered.
	⁃	Push the “Start Server” button.  The server application will request confirmation from you to start, click the “YES” button to proceed and “NO” if you choose not to. The status of the server is displayed right above the pushbuttons in the server GUI. 
	4.	If there are an issues starting the server, look in the application log file for diagnostic information. The file is named “BrokerApp.log” and it will be in the run directory.
	5.	When the server is running, modifications of the server configuration parameters will be disabled.
	6.	When the server is running, the “Start Server” button will be disabled, only the “Stop Server” and “Exit” buttons will be enabled.

Stopping the Server
	1.	In order to stop the server, it must have been started. The “Stop Server” button will not be activated until the server has been started.
	2.	Press the “Stop Server” button and a confirmation dialog will come up.
	3.	Click “Yes” on the confirmation dialog and the server will be stopped.
	4.	The status label will state that the server has been stopped.

Exiting the Server
	1.	The server application can be terminated at any time, before or after the server is started. The “Exit” option terminates the RMI server and also dismisses the server GUI.
	2.	To terminate the server application, push the “Exit” button or select “Quit” under the “File” menu. Either action will result in the display of the confirmation dialog.
	3.	Click “Yes” on the confirmation dialog to proceed or “No” otherwise.

Running the Network Client
In order to run the network client successfully, the server must have been started. Following are the instructions for starting the network client. 
	1.	Place the runme.jar file and the properties file in the same directory, the property file name is suncertify.properties. 
	2.	Type the following on the command line and then press return.
	⁃	java -jar runme.jar &
	3.	The above command would result in the display of the “Application Client Dialog”. Enter the requested parameters and push the “Okay” button afterwards. To terminate the startup process, simply click the “Exit” button.
	⁃	Enter the server host name in the text field labeled “Server Host Name”. This is the name of the machine on which the RMI server is deployed.
	⁃	Enter the RMI server name in the text field labeled “Server Name”. This is the same name that was given to the RMI server during the server startup. 
	⁃	Modify the text area labeled “Specialities” if needed, the entries are delimited by a coma and space - “, “. Values can ONLY be added to this list. 
	4.	Once the configuration parameters have been entered, click the “Okay” button and the “Application Client Configuration” window will be replaced by the application main GUI. 
	5.	The application main GUI displays all the active contractors records in the system on first appearance.

Running the Standalone Client
	1.	Place the runme.jar file and the properties file in the same directory, the property file name is suncertify.properties. 
	2.	Type the following on the command line and then press return.
	⁃	java -jar runme.jar alone &
	3.	The above command would result in the display of the “Application Client Dialog”. Enter the requested parameters and push the “Okay” button afterwards. To terminate the startup process, simply click the “Exit” button.
	⁃	Enter the database file name in the text field labeled “Database File Name” or use the file chooser by clicking the button next to the text field.
	⁃	Modify the text area labeled “Specialities” if needed, the entries are delimited by a coma and space - “, “. Values can ONLY be added to this list. 
	4.	Once the configuration parameters have been entered, click the “Okay” button and the “Application Client Configuration” window will be replaced by the application main GUI. 
	5.	The application main GUI displays all the active contractors records in the system on first appearance.

The Application Client Main GUI
The application client main GUI is made up of three components -
	1.	A Menubar. The menubar has two main menus - the “File” and “Edit” menus.
	⁃	The File Menu - has three menu items
	⁃	New - this is always enabled. Selecting this will result in the display of the “New Contractor” dialog.
	⁃	Open - this is enabled only when a record is selected in the record display area. Selecting this will result in the display of the “Contractor Update” dialog.
	⁃	Exit - this is always enabled. Selecting this will result in the display of the application exit dialog.
	⁃	The Edit Menu
	⁃	Search - this is always enabled. Selecting this will result in the display of the “Contractor Search” dialog.
	⁃	Delete - this is only displayed when a record is selected in the record display area. Selecting this will result in the display of the “Delete Contractor” dialog.
	⁃	Book - this is only displayed when a record is selected in the record display area. Selecting this will result in the display of the “Book Contractor” dialog.
	⁃	Release - this is only displayed when a record is selected in the record display area. Selecting this will result in the display of the “Release Contractor” dialog.
	2.	A Records Display Area - The records display area uses a table to display records.
	⁃	The table supports single row selection only - in other words you can select only one record at a time.
	⁃	The table header uses an orange background to distinguish the headings.
	⁃	The table will be updated whenever a modification is made on the database. All the clients running in network mode and connected to the same server will get update notifications resulting in the update of the records in the display table. However this depends on the search criteria used to get the list of displayed records. More on this later.
	⁃	The table does not support the editing of cells, it is strictly a read only table.
	3.	A Panel Of Buttons - this panel has six buttons - one for each of the operations allowed in the application. Each of the buttons will display their functionality whenever they have mouse focus.
	⁃	New - this is always enabled. Clicking this will result in the display of the “New Contractor” dialog.
	⁃	Search - this is always enabled. Clicking this will result in the display of the “Search For Contractor” dialog.
	⁃	Delete - this is enabled when a row is selected in the records display table. Clicking this will result in the display of the “Delete Contractor” dialog.
	⁃	Book - this is enabled when a row is selected in the records display table. Clicking this will result in the display of the “Book Contractor” dialog.
	⁃	Release - this is enabled when a row is selected in the records display table. Clicking this will result in the display of the “Release Contractor” dialog.
	⁃	Update - this is enabled when a row is selected in the records display table. Clicking this will result in the display of the “Update Contractor” dialog.

All the dialogs used in the main GUI are modal, this means that only one operation could be done at a time. The same dialog is used for the different operations, the differences being the title displayed, the label on the action button for the dialog and the components that are enabled. The different operations are discussed next.

Adding A New Contractor Record
	1.	Select “New” under the File menu or click on the “New” button in the button panel. 
	2.	The client dialog will be displayed with all the fields except the “owners”  field enabled.
	3.	Enter the required information in all the fields. Nothing could be left blank. 
	4.	It is important to enter the “name” and “location” fields exactly as they are spelled. The combination of both fields is considered the record key in the database and once entered they can never be modified. 
	5.	Enter the requested information in the dialog and click the “Add” button when done. 
	6.	Click “Yes” on the confirmation dialog.
	7.	An information dialog will be displayed giving the status of the add operation.
	8.	If there is a record in the database that has both “name” and “location” attributes that match those of the new record, the new record will not be added. 
	9.	After the successful addition of the new record, it may not be displayed in the record display table if it does not match the criteria used in the search that resulted in the records being displayed.

Searching For Contractors
	1.	Select “Search” under the Edit menu or click on the “Search” button in the button panel.
	2.	There are two search modes supported by the application - Key Search and Generic Search.
	⁃	Key Search - in this mode only the “name” and “location” criteria must be entered in the search dialog, all the other fields must be left blank. In this mode, only the record with both “name” and “location” attributes that match the criteria exactly will be returned.
	⁃	Generic Search - in the generic search mode all the attributes of a record are considered. Following are the matching rules for the different attributes. For a record to be selected, it must match all the specified criteria. If no value is entered in any criterion, it is considered a wild card, all the active records are considered a match for that criterion.
	⁃	Name attribute - A match if the attribute starts with the specified criterion.
	⁃	Location attribute - A match if the attribute starts with the specified criterion. 
	⁃	Specialities attribute - A match if the attribute has all the specialities in the criterion.
	⁃	Size attribute - A match if the size attribute is greater than or equal to the specified criterion.
	⁃	Rate attribute - A match if the rate attribute is less than or equal to the specified criterion.
	⁃	Owner attribute - A match if the attribute starts with the specified criterion. If the criterion is equal to “+”, only unbooked records will be included in the result If the criterion equals “-“, only booked records will be included.
	3.	When the “Search” dialog is presented, enter the appropriate parameters and click the search button.
	4.	Click “Yes” on the confirmation dialog.
	5.	An information dialog will be displayed giving the status of the search operation. 

Deleting A Contractor
	1.	Select the record to be deleted by clicking the mouse on the corresponding row in the record display table.
	2.	Select “Delete” menu item from the Edit menu or click on the “Delete” button on the button panel. 
	3.	If the selected record is currently booked, the “Delete Record” dialog will not be presented, a dialog stating that the record is currently booked will be displayed.
	4.	If the dialog is displayed, click the “Delete” button. Take note that editing of all fields are disabled in this dialog.
	5.	Click “yes” on the confirmation dialog.
	6.	The information dialog will be displayed giving the status of the delete operation.

Booking A Contractor
	1.	Select the record to be booked by clicking the mouse on the corresponding row in the record display table.
	2.	Select the “Book” menu item from the Edit menu or click on the “Book” button on the button panel. 
	3.	If the selected record is currently booked, the “Book Record” dialog will not be presented, a dialog stating that the record is currently booked will be displayed.
	4.	If the dialog is displayed enter a valid customer number in the owner text field in the dialog.  Take note that editing of all fields are disabled in this dialog except the owner field.
	5.	Click the “Book” button.
	6.	Click “yes” on the confirmation dialog.
	7.	The information dialog will be displayed giving the status of the book operation.

Releasing A Contractor
	1.	Select the record to be released by clicking the mouse on the corresponding row in the record display table.
	2.	Select the “Release” menu item from the Edit menu or click on the “Release” button on the button panel. 
	3.	If the selected record is not currently booked, the “Release Record” dialog will not be presented, a dialog stating that the record is not currently booked will be displayed instead.
	4.	If the dialog is displayed set the owner text field in the dialog spaces. It is quite possible to avoid the requirement to set field to spaces, but the goal is to add a little visual context to this action. Take note that editing of all fields are disabled in this dialog except the owner field.
	5.	Click the “Release” button.
	6.	Click “yes” on the confirmation dialog.
	7.	The information dialog will be displayed giving the status of the release operation.

Updating A Contractor
	1.	Select the record to be updated by clicking the mouse on the corresponding row in the record display table.
	2.	Select the “Open” menu item from the File menu or click on the “Update” button on the button panel. 
	3.	If the selected record is not currently booked, the “Update Record” dialog will be presented, if it is booked a dialog stating that the record is currently booked will be displayed instead.
	4.	If the dialog is displayed, make the required modifications. Take note that editing of the “name”, “location” and “owner” fields are disabled in this dialog.
	5.	Click the “Update” button.
	6.	Click “yes” on the confirmation dialog.
	7.	The information dialog will be displayed giving the status of the update operation.

Some Rules Regarding These Operations
	1.	A record cannot be deleted, updated or booked if it is currently booked.
	2.	A record cannot be released if it is not booked.
	3.	It is possible for any of the four operations “delete”, “update”, “book” and “release” to fail if the record had been modified since the last time it was read by the client making the request to do any of the operations. 
	4.	The only attribute that is allowed to be blank in a record is the “owner” attribute, which indicates that the record is not currently booked.
	5.	When not blank, the owner field must be an eight digit number.
	6.	The value in the size field must be a value between 1 and 9,999. This is enforced during the editing of the field.
	7.	The value in the rate field must be a value between $10 and $999. This is also enforced during the editing of the field.

Exiting the Application Main GUI 
	1.	Select the “Exit” menu item from the File menu.
	2.	This will result in the display of the “Application Exit” confirmation dialog. 
	3.	Click the “Yes” option on the dialog to exit the application or the “No” option to keep the client GUI running. 

